good evening i'm bill chanel of abc news
it's my privilege to this evening to
preside at this the third in the series
of meetings on radio and television of
the two major presidential candidates i
like the last meeting the subjects to be
discussed will be suggested by questions
from a panel of correspondents unlike
the first two programs however the two
candidates will not be sharing the same
platform in new york the democratic
presidential nominee senator john f
kennedy separated by 3,000 miles in a
los angeles studio the republican
presidential nominee vice president
richard m nixon now join for tonight's
discussion by a network of the
electronic facilities which permits each
candidate to seri see and hear the other
good evening senator kennedy good
evening mr dale and good evening to you
vice-president nixon
good evening mr shido and now to meet
the panel of correspondents frank mcgee
nbc news charles von fremd
cbs news douglas cater reporter magazine
roscoe drummond new york herald tribune
now as you probably noted the for
reporters include a newspaperman at a
magazine reporter these two selected by
lot by the press secretaries of the
candidates from among the reporters
traveling with the candidates
broadcasting representatives were chosen
by their companies the rules for this
evening have been agreed upon by the
representatives of both candidates and
the radio and television networks and i
should like to read it there will be no
opening statements by the candidates nor
any closing summation the entire hour
will be devoted to answering questions
from the reporters each candidate to be
questioned in turn with opportunity for
comment by the others each answer will
be limited to 2 and 1/2 minutes each
comment to one and a half minutes the
reporters are free to ask any question
they choose on any subject neither
candidate knows what questions will be
time alone will be determined who will
be asked the final question now the
first question is from mr mcgee and is
for senator kennedy senator kennedy
yesterday you used the words
trigger-happy in referring to vice
president richard nixon's stand on
defending the islands of komoi and matsu
last week on a program like this one you
said the next president would come face
to face with a serious crisis in berlin
so the question is would you take
military action to defend berlin mr
mcgee we have a contractual right to be
in berlin coming out of the
conversations at potsdam and a world war
2 that has been reinforced by direct
commitments of the president of the
united states it's been reinforced by a
number of other nations under nato i
have stated on many occasions that the
united states must meet its commitment
on berlin it is a commitment that we
have to meet if we're going to protect
the security of western europe and
therefore on this question i don't think
that there is any doubt in the mind of
any american i hope there is not any
doubt in the mind of any member of the
community of west berlin i'm sure there
isn't any doubt in the mind of the
russians we will meet our commitments to
maintain the freedom and independence of
west berlin mr vice president do you
wish to comment yes as a matter of fact
the statement that senator kennedy made
was that to the effect that there were
trigger-happy republicans that my stand
on chemo and matsu was an indication of
trigger-happy republicans i resent that
comment i resent it because it's an
implication that republicans have been
trigger-happy and therefore would lead
this nation into war i would remind
senator kennedy of the past 50 years i
would ask him the name one republican
president who led this nation into war
there were three democratic presidents
who led us into war i do not mean by
that that one party of the war party and
the other party is a peace party but i
do say that any statement to the effect
that the republican party is
trigger-happy is belied by the record we
had a war when we came into power in
we got rid of that we've kept out of
other wars and certainly that doesn't
indicate that we're trigger-happy we've
been strong but we haven't been
trigger-happy as far as berlin is
concerned there isn't any question about
the necessity of defending berlin the
rights of people there to be free and
there isn't any question about what the
united american people republicans and
democrats alike would do in the event
there were an attempt by the communists
to take over in berlin the next question
is by mr von fremd for vice-president
mr vice president a two-part question
concerning the offshore islands in the
formosa straits
if you were president and the chinese
communist tomorrow began an invasion of
como and matsu would you launch the
united states into a war by sending the
seventh fleet and other military forces
to resist this aggression and secondly
if the regular conventional forces
failed to halt such a such an invasion
would you authorize the use of nuclear
weapons mr von fragment would be
completely irresponsible for a candidate
for the presidency or for a president
himself to indicate the course of action
and the weapons he would use in the
event of such an attack i will say this
in the event that such an attack
occurred and in the event the attack was
a prelude to an attack on formosa which
would be the indication today because
the chinese communists say over and over
again that their objective is not the
offshore islands that they consider them
only stepping stones to taking formosa
in the event that they're attacked then
were a prelude to an attack on famosa
there isn't any question but that the
united states would then again as in the
case of berlin honor our treaty
obligations and stand by our ally of
promotion but to indicate in advance how
we would respond to indicate the nature
of his response would be incorrect it
would certainly be inappropriate it
would not be in the best interest of the
united states i will only say this
however in addition to do what senator
kennedy has suggested to suggest that we
will surrender these islands or force
our chinese nationalist allies to
surrender them in it
is not something that would lead to
peace it is something that would lead in
my opinion to war this is the history of
dealing with dictators this is something
that senator kennedy and all americans
must know we tried this with hitler it
didn't work he wanted first we know
austria and then he went on to the
sedating land and then danzig and each
time it was thought this is all that he
wanted now what did the chinese
communists want they don't want just
chemo and matsu they don't watch us from
all so they want the world and the
question is if you surrender or indicate
in advance that you're not going to
defend any part of the free world and
you figure that's going to satisfy them
it doesn't satisfy them it only puts
their appetites and then the question
comes when do you stop them i've often
heard president eisenhower in discussing
this question make the statement that if
we won't start the process of indicating
that this point or that point is not the
place to stop those who threaten the
peace and freedom of the world where do
we stop and i say that those of us who
stand against surrender of territory
this or any others in the face of
blackmail in the space of force by the
communists are standing for the course
that will lead to peace senator kennedy
do you wish to comment yes the hope the
united states now has a treaty which i
voted for in the united states senate in
1955 to defend from osha and the
pescadores island the islands which mr
nixon is discussing are five or four
miles respectively off the coast of
china now when senator green the
chairman of the senate foreign relations
committee roche of the president he
received back on the 2nd of october 1958
neither you nor any other american need
feel the us will be involved in military
hostilities merely in the defense of
chamoy amass now that is the issue i
believe we must meet our commitment to
promotion i support it and the
pescadores island that is the president
american position the treaty does not
include these two islands mr nixon
suggests that the united states should
go to
if these two islands are attacked i
suggest that if famosa is attacked or
the pescadores or if there's any
military action in any area which
indicates an attack on formosa and the
pescadores then of course the united
states is at war to defend its treaty
now i must say what mr nixon wants to
do is commit us as i understand him so
that we can be clear if there's a
disagreement he wants us to be committed
to the defense of these islands nearly
as the defense of these islands is free
territory not as part of the defense of
promotion admiral yarnell the commander
of the asiatic fleet has said that these
islands are not worth the bones of a
single american the president of the
united states has indicated they are not
within the treaty area they were not
within the treaty area when the treaty
was passed in 55 we have attempted to
persuade chiang kai-shek as late as
january of 1959 to reduce the number of
troops he has on there this is a serious
issue and i think we ought to understand
if we disagree and if so where mr kator
has the next question for senator
kennedy senator kennedy last week you
said that before we should hold another
summits conference but it was important
that the united states build its
strength modern weapons takes quite a
long time to build
what sort of prolonged period do you
envisage before there can be a summit
conference and you think that there can
be any new initiatives on the grounds of
nuclear disarmament nuclear control or
weapons control during this period well
i think we should strengthen our
conventional forces and we should
attempt in january february and march of
next year to increase the airlift
capacity of our conventional forces then
i believe that we should move full time
on our missile production particularly
on minuteman and on polaris it may be a
long period but we must we must get
started immediately now on the question
of disarmament particularly nuclear
disarmament i must say that i feel that
another effort should be made by a new
administration in january of 1961 to
renew negotiations with the soviet union
and see whether it's possible to come to
some conclusion which were less than the
chances of contamination of the
atmosphere and also lessen the chances
that other powers will begin to possess
a nuclear capacity
there are indications because of new
inventions the 10 15 or 20 nations will
have a nuclear capacity including red
china by the end of the presidential
office in 1964 this is extremely serious
there have been many wars in the history
of mankind and to take a chance now and
not make every effort that we could make
to provide for some control over these
weapons i think would be a great mistake
one of my disagreements with the present
administration has been that i don't
feel a real effort has been made on this
very sensitive subject not only of
nuclear control but also of general
disarmament less than a hundred people
have been working throughout the entire
federal government on this subject and i
believe it's been reflected in our
success and failures at geneva now we
may not succeed the soviet union may not
agree to an inspection system we may not
be able to get satisfactory assurances
it may be necessary for us to begin
testing again but i hope the next
administration and if i have anything to
do with it the next administration will
make one last great effort to provide
for control of nuclear testing control
of nuclear weapons if possible control
of outer space free from weapons and
also to begin again the subject of
general disarmament level these must be
done if we cannot succeed then we must
strengthen ourselves but i would make
the effort because i think the fate not
only of our own civilization but i think
the fate of world and the future of the
human race is involved in preventing a
nuclear war mr vice president's your
comment yes i am going to make a major
speech on this whole subject next week
before the next debate and i will have
an opportunity then to answer any other
questions that may arise with regard to
my position on it there isn't any
question but that we must move forward
in every possible way
to reduce the danger of war to move
toward control disarmament to control
test but also let's have in mind this
when senator kennedy suggests that we
haven't been making an effort he simply
doesn't know what he's talking about it
isn't a question of the number of people
who are working in an administration
it's a question of who they are this has
been one of the highest level operations
in the whole state department right
the president himself we have gone
certainly the extra mile and then some
and making offers to the soviet union on
control of tests on disarmament and in
every other way and i just want to make
one thing very clear yes we should make
a great effort but under no
circumstances must the united states
ever make an agreement based on trust
there must be an absolute guarantee now
just to comment on senator kennedy's
last answer he forgets that in this same
debate on the promotes a resolution
which he said he voted for which he did
that he voted against an amendment or
was recorded against an amendment and on
this particular or for the men but i
should say which passed the senate
overwhelmingly 72 12 and that amendment
put the senator of the united states on
record with a majority of the senators
own party voting for it as well as the
majority of republicans put them on
record against the very position that
the senator takes now of surrendering of
indicating in advance that the united
states will not defend the offshore
islands the next question is by mr
drummond for vice president nixon mr
nixon i would like to ask one more
aspect or raise another aspect of the
same question it is my understanding
that president eisenhower never
advocated that komoi and matsu should be
defended under all circumstances as a
matter of principle i heard secretary
dulles at a press conference in 58 say
that he thought that it was a mistake
for chiang kai-shek to deploy troops to
these islands i would like to ask what
has led you to take what appears to be a
different position on this subject mr
drummond first of all referring to
secretary dulles press conference i
think if you read it all and i know that
you have you will find that secretary
dulles also indicated in that press
conference that when the troops were
withdrawn from t moy that the
implication was certainly of everything
that he said that komoi could better be
defended there were too many infantrymen
there not enough heavy artillery and
certainly i don't think there was any
implication in secretary dollars a
statement that chemo and matsu
should not be defended in the event that
they were attacked and that attack was a
preliminary to an attack on promo so now
as far as president eisenhower is
concerned i have often heard him discuss
this question as i related a moment ago
the president has always indicated that
we must not make the mistake in dealing
with the dictator of indicating that we
are going to make a concession at the
point of a gun whenever you do that
inevitably the dictator is encouraged to
try it again so first it will be chemo
and matsu next it may be promotion what
do we do then my point is this that once
you do this follow this course of action
of indicating that you are not going to
defend a particular area the inevitable
result is that it encourages a man who
is determined to conquer the world to
press you to the point of no return and
that means war we went through this
tragic experience leading to world war
two we learned our lesson again in korea
we must not learn it again that is why i
think the senate was right including a
majority of the democrats a majority of
the republicans when they rejected
senator kennedy's position in 1955 and
incidentally senator johnson was among
those who rejected that position voted
with the 70 against the 12 the senate
was right because they knew the lesson
of history and may i say to that i would
trust that senator kennedy would change
his position on it changes because as
long as he as a major presidential
candidate continues to suggest that we
are going to turn over these islands he
is only encouraging the aggressors the
chinese communists and the soviet
aggressors to press the united states to
press s to the point where war would be
inevitable the road to war is always
paved with good intention and in this
instance the good intentions of course
are a desire for peace but certainly
we're not going to have peace by giving
in and indicating in advance that we are
not going to defend what has become a
symbol of freedom senator kennedy i
don't think it's possible for mr nixon
to state the record in distortion of the
facts with morrissey
he just did 1955 mr dulles at a press
conference said the treaty that we have
with the republic of china excludes
komoi and matsu from the treaty area
that was done with much thought and
deliberation therefore that treaty does
not commit the united states to defend
anything except promotion and the
pescadores and a deal with acts against
that treaty area
i completely sustained the treaty i
voted for it i would take any action
necessary to defend the treaty formosa
and the pescadores island but we're now
talking about is the vice president's
determination to guarantee crow muy and
masa which are four and five miles off
the coast of red china which are not
within the treaty area i do not suggest
the chiang kai-shek and this
administration has been attempting since
1955 to persuade chiang kai-shek to
lessen his troop commitment he sent a
mission the president in 1955 of mr
robinson and admiral radford general
twining said they were still doing it in
general ridgway said with chief of staff
to go to war for amoy amatsu to me would
seem an unwarranted and tragic course to
take to me that concept is completely
repugnant so i stand with him i stand
with the secretary of state mr hurd who
said these islands were indefensible i
believe that we should meet our
commitment and if the chinese communists
attacked the pescadores and formosa they
know that it will mean a war i would not
hand over these island under any point
of gun but i merely say that the treaty
is quite precise and i sustained the
treaty mr nixon with air day guarantee
islands five miles off the coast of the
republic of china when he's never really
protested the communists seized in cuba
90 miles off the coast of the united
states mr von fremd has a question for
senator kennedy senator kennedy i'd like
to shift the conversation if i may to a
domestic political argument the chairman
of the republican national committee
senator thurston morton declared earlier
this week that you owed vice president
nixon and the republican party a public
apology for some strong charges made by
former president harry truman who
bluntly suggested where the vice
president and the republican party could
go do you feel that you owe
vice president and apology well i must
say that mr truman has his methods of
expressing things he's been in politics
for 50 years he's been president of the
united states
maybe not my style but i really don't
think there's anything that i can say to
president truman's going to cause him at
the age of 76 to change his particular
speaking manner perhaps mrs truman can
but i don't think i can i just have to
tell mr morton that you pass that
message on to him
any comment mr vice president
yes i think so of course both senator
kennedy and i have felt mr truman fire
and consequently i think he can speak
with some feeling on this subject i just
do want to say one thing however we all
have tempers i have one i'm sure senator
kennedy has one but when a man's
president of the united states or a
former president he has an obligation
not to lose his temper in public one
thing i have noted as i've traveled
around the country are the tremendous
number of children who come out to see
the presidential candidates
i see mothers holding their babies up so
that they can see a man who might be
present in the united states i know
senator kennedy sees them too it makes
you realize that whoever is president is
going to be a man that all the children
of america will either look up to or
will look down to and i can only say
that i am very proud that president
eisenhower restored ignant ii and
decency and frankly good language to the
conduct of the presidency of the united
states and i only hope that should i win
this election that i could approach
president eisenhower in maintaining the
dignity of the office in seeing to it
that whenever any mother or father talks
to his child he can look at the man in
the white house and whatever he may
think of his policies he will say well
there is a man who maintains the kind of
standards personally that i would want
my child to follow mr katers question
is for vice president nixon its vice
president i'd like to return just once
more for me to this area of dealing with
the calm
critics have claimed that on at least
three occasions in recent years on the
sending of american troops to indochina
in 1954 on a matter of continuing the u2
flights in may and then on this
definition of the of our commitment to
the offshore island that you have
overstated the administration position
that you have taken a more bellicose
position than president eisenhower just
two days ago you said that you called on
senator kennedy to serve notice to
communist aggressors around the world
that we're not going to retreat one inch
more anyplace whereas we did retreat
from the touch an island or at least
chiang kai-shek did would you say this
was a valid criticism of your statement
of foreign policy
well mr kator of course it's a
criticism that is being made i obviously
don't think it's valid
i have supported the administration's
position and i think that that position
has been correct i think my position has
been correct as far as indochina is
concerned i stated over and over again
that it was essential during that period
that the united states make it clear
that we would not tolerate indochina
falling under communist domination now
as a result of our taking the strong
stand that we did the civil war there
was ended and the day at least in the
south of indochina the communists have
moved out and we do have a strong free
bastion there now looking to the u2
flights i would like to point out that i
have been supporting the president's
position throughout i think the
president was correct in ordering these
flights i think the president was
correct certainly in his decision to
continue the flights while the
conference was going on i noted for
example in reading a a particular
discussion that senator kennedy had with
dave garroway
shortly after the his statement about
regrets that he made the statement that
he felt that these particular flights
were ones that shouldn't have occurred
right at that time and the indication
was how would mr khrushchev had felt if
we had had a fight over the you know
how would we have felt mr cruciate had
a fight over the united states while he
was visiting here and the answer of
course is that communist espionage goes
on all the time the answer is that the
united states can't afford to have eight
nsa's espionage lack or should we start
lag or should i say an intelligence lag
any more than we can afford to have a
missile and now referring to your
question with regard to chemo and matsu
what i object to here is the constant
reference to surrendering these islands
senator kennedy ports the record which
he read from a moment ago but what he
forgets to point out is that the key
vote a vote which i referred to several
times where he was in the minority was
one which rejected his position now why
did they reject it for the very reason
that those senators knew as the
president of the united states knew that
you should not indicate to the
communists in advance that you're going
to surrender an area that's free why
because they know as senator kennedy
will have to know that if you do that
you encourage them to more aggression
under kennedy or number one on indochina
mr nixon talked and before the
newspaper editors in the spring of 1954
about putting and i quote him american
boys into indochina
reason indochina was preserved was a
result of the geneva conference which
petitioned indochina number two on the
question of the u2 flights
i thought the u2 flight in may just
before the conference was a mistake in
timing because of the hazards involved
if the summit conference had any hope
for success
i never criticized the u2 flight in
general however i never suggested
espionage should stop it still goes on i
would assume on both sides number three
the vice president on may fifteenth
after the u2 flight indicated that the
flights were going on even though the
administration and the president had
canceled the flights on may 12 number
three the president suggests that we
should keep the communists in doubt
about whether we would fight on komoi
matter that's not the position he's
taking he's indicating that we should
fight for these islands come what may
because they are in his words in the
area of freedom he didn't take
position on tibet he didn't take that
position in budapest he doesn't take
that position that i've seen so far in
layoff guinea and ghana have both moved
within the soviet sphere of influence
and foreign policy so his cuba i merely
say that the united states should meet
its commitments to crew to formosa and
the pescadores but as admiral yarnell
it's dead and he's been supported by
most military authority these islands
that we're now talking about are not
worth the bones of a single american
soldier and i know how difficult it is
to sustain troops close to the shore
under artillery bombardment and
therefore i think we should make it very
clear the disagreement between mr nixon
myself is extending the administration's
commitment mr drummond's question is
for senator kennedy mr kennedy
representative adam clayton powell in
the course of his speaking tour in your
behalf is saying and i quote the ku klux
klan is riding again in this campaign if
it doesn't stop all bigots will vote for
nixon and all right-thinking christians
and jews will vote for kennedy rather
than be found in the ranks of the klan
minded end quotation governor michael
desalle is saying much the same thing
what i would like to ask senator kennedy
is what is the purpose of this sort of
thing and how do you feel about it well
the quick mr griffin i believe who is
the head of the clan who lives in tampa
florida indicated a in a statement i
think two or three weeks ago that he was
not going to vote for me and that he was
going to vote for mr nixon i do not
suggest in any way or have i ever that
indicates that mr nixon has the
slightest sympathy involvement or in any
way imply any inferences in regard the
ku klux klan that's absurd i don't
suggest that i don't support it i would
just agree with it mr nixon know it
very well then it's this whole matter
it's been involved in the so-called
religious discussion in this campaign i
have never suggested even by the vaguest
implication but he did anything but
disapprove of it and that's my view now
i disapprove of the issue i do not
suggest that mr nixon does in any way
mr vice president
well i welcome this opportunity to join
senator kennedy come
lately on that statement and to say
before this largest television audience
in history something that i have been
saying in the past and one of will
always say in the future on our last
television debate i pointed out that it
was my position that americans must
choose the best man that either party
could produce we can't settle for
anything but the best and that means of
course the best man that this nation can
produce and that means that we can't
have any test of religion we can't have
any test of race it must be a test of
the man also as far as religion is
concerned i have seen communism abroad i
see what it does communism is the enemy
of all religion and we who do believe in
god must join together we must not be
divided on this issue the worst thing
that i can think can happen in this
campaign would be for it to be decided a
religious issue
i obviously repudiate the klan i
repudiate anybody who uses the religious
issue i will not tolerate it i have
ordered all of my people to have nothing
to do with it and i taste a to this
great audience whoever may be listening
remember if you believe in america if
you want america to set the right
example to the world that we cannot have
religious or racial prejudice we cannot
have it in our hearts but we certainly
cannot have it in a presidential
campaign destined for vice president
mr vice president some of your early
campaign literature said you were making
a study to see if new laws were needed
to protect the public against excessive
use of power by labor unions have you
decided whether such new laws are needed
and if so what would they do mr mcgee i
am planning a speech on that subject
next week also so that we can get the
opportunity for the questioners to
question me it will be before the next
television debate i will say simply in
advance of it that i believe that in
this area the laws which should be
as far as the big national emergency
strikes are concerned are ones that will
give the president more weapons with
which to deal with those strikes now i
have a basic disagreement with senator
kennedy though on this point he has
taken the position he first indicated in
october of last year that he would even
favor compulsory arbitration as one of
the weapons the president might have
bestop a national emergency strike i
understand in his last speech before the
steel workers union that he changed that
position and indicated that he felt that
government seizure might be the best way
to stop the strike which could not be
settled by collective bargaining i do
not believe we should have either
compulsory arbitration or seizure i
think the moment that you give to the
union on the one side and the management
on the other side the escape hatch of
eventually going the government to get
it settled that most of these great
strikes will end up being settled by
government and that will a be in the end
in my opinion wage control it will mean
price control all the things that we do
not want i do believe however that we
can give to the president of the united
states powers in addition to what he
presently has in the fact-finding area
which would enable him to be more
effective than we have been in handling
these strikes one last point i should
make the record in handling has been
very good during this administration we
have had less man-hours lost by strikes
in these last seven years than we had in
the previous seven years by a great deal
and i only want to say that however good
the record is it's got to be better
because in this critical year period of
the 60s we've got to move forward all
americans must move forward together and
we have to get the greatest cooperation
possible between labor and management
we cannot afford stoppages of massive
effect on the economy and we're in the
terrible competition we're in with the
soviet senator your comment why always
have difficulty recognizing my positions
when they're stated by the vice
president i never suggested that
compulsory arbitration was a solution
for national emergency dispute i'm
opposed to that was opposed to in
october 1958 i have suggested that the
president should be given other weapons
to protect the national interest in case
of national emergency strikes beyond the
injunction provision of the taft-hartley
act i don't know what other weapons the
vice president is talking about i'm
talking about giving him four or five
tools not only the fact-finding
committee that he now has under the
injunction provision not only the
injunction but also the power of the
fact-finding commission to make
recommendations recommendations which
would not be binding but nevertheless
would have great force of public opinion
behind them one of the additional powers
that i would suggest would be seizure
there might be others i had the
president having five powers four or
five powers and he only has very limited
powers today neither the company nor the
union would be sure which power would be
used and therefore there would be a
greater incentive on both sides to reach
an agreement themselves without taking
it to the government the difficulty now
is the president's course is quite
limited you can set up a fact-finding
committee the fact-finding committees
powers are limited he can provide an
injunction if there's a national
emergency for 80 days then the strike
can go on and there are no other powers
or actions that the president could take
unless he went to the congress this is a
difficult and sensitive matter but to
state my view precisely the president
should have a variety of things he could
do he could leave the parties and doubt
as to which one he would use and
therefore there would be incentive
instead of as now steel companies were
ready to take the strike because they
felt the injunction of 80 days would
break the union which didn't happen the
next question is by mr kator
or senator kennedy mr kennedy senator
vice president nixon says that he has
costed the two party platforms and that
yours would run at least ten billion
dollars a year more than his you've
denied his figures he is called on you
to supply your figures would you do that
yes i have stated in both the debates
the state again that i believe in a
balanced budget and have supported that
concept during my 14 years in the
congress the only two times when an
unbalanced budget is warranted would be
during a serious recession and we had
that in 58 in an unbalanced budget of 12
billion dollars for a national emergency
where there should be large expenditures
the national defense which we had in
world war two and during part of the
korean war on the question of the cost
of our budget
i have stated that it's five best
judgment that our agricultural program
will cost a billion and a half possibly
two billion dollars less than the
president agricultural program my
judgment is that the program the vice
president put forward which is an
extension of mr benson's program will
cost a billion dollars more than the
present program which costs about six
billion dollars a year the most
expensive in history we spent more money
on agriculture in the last eight years
than the hundred years of the
agricultural department before that
secondly i believe that the high
interest rate policy that this
administration has followed has added
about three billion dollars a year to
interest on the death
billee funding the death which is a
burden on the tax base
i would hope under a different monetary
policy it would be possible to reduce
that interest rate burden at least a
billion dollars third i think it's
possible to gain a 700 million to a
billion dollars through tax changes
which i believe would close a poof
loophole on dividend withholding on
expense accounts fourthly i have
suggested that the medical care for the
aged and the bill which the congress now
has passed the president signed if fully
implemented would cost a billion dollars
on the treasury out of the treasury fund
and a billion dollars by the state
proposal that i have put forward and
which many of the members of my party
support is for medical care financed
under social security which would be
financed under the social security taxes
which is less than three cents a day for
a person for medical care doctor's bills
nurses hospitals when they retire it is
actually sound so in my judgment we
would spend more money than this
administration on aid to education we'd
spend more money on housing we'd spend
more money and i hope more wisely on
defense in this administration is done
but i believe that the next
administration should work for balanced
budget and that would be my intention
mr nixon mistakes might think is
constantly which is of course is right
but the fact of the matter is here is
where i stand and i just want to have it
on the public record mr vice president
senator kennedy is indicated on several
occasions in this program the night that
i've been miss stating his record in his
figures i will issue a white paper after
this broadcast voting exactly what he
said on compulsory arbitration for
example and the record will show that i
have been correct
now as far as his figures are concerned
here tonight he again is engaging in
this what i would call mirror game of
here it is and here it is on the one
hand for example he suggests that as far
as his medical care program is concerned
that that really isn't a problem because
it's from social security but social
security is a tax the people pay it it
comes right out of your paycheck this
doesn't mean that the people aren't
going to be paying the bill
he also indicates as far as his
agricultural program is concerned that
he feels it will cost less than ours all
that i can suggest is that all the
experts who have studied the program
indicate that it is the most fantastic
program the worst program insofar as its
effect on the farmers that america has
ever had hoisted upon it in an election
year or any other time and i would also
point out that senator kennedy left out
a part of the cost of that program a 25
rise in food prices that the people
would have to pay now are we going to
have that when it isn't going to help
the farmers i don't think we should have
that kind of a program then he goes on
to say that he's going to change the
interest rate situation and we're going
to get some more money that way but what
he's saying there in effect we're gonna
have inflation we're going to go right
back to what we had under mr truman
when he had political control of the
federal reserve board i don't believe we
ought to pay our bills through inflation
through a phony interest rate next mr
drummond's question for vice president
nixon a mr nixon before the convention
you'll and governor rockefeller said
jointly that the nation's economic
growth ought to be accelerated and the
republican platform states that the
nation needs to quicken the pace of
economic growth is it fair therefore mr
vice president to conclude that you feel
that there has been insufficient
economic growth during the past eight
years and if so what would you do
beyond present administration policies
to step it up mr drummond i am never
satisfied with the economic growth of
this country i'm not satisfied with it
even if there were no communist
in the world but particularly when we're
in the kind of a race we're in we have
got to see that america grows just as
fast as we can provided we grow soundly
because even though we have maintained
as i pointed out in our first debate the
absolute gap over the soviet union even
though the growth in this administration
has been twice as much as it was in the
truman administration that isn't good
enough because america must be able to
grow enough not only to take care of our
needs at home for better education and
housing and health all these things we
want we've got to grow enough to
maintain the forces that we have abroad
and to wage the non-military battle for
the wall for the world in asia in africa
and latin america it's going to cost
more money and growth will help us to
win that battle now what do we do about
it and here i believe basically that
what we have to do is to stimulate that
sector of america the private enterprise
sector of the economy in which there is
the greatest possibility for expansion
so that is why i advocate a program of
tax reform which will stimulate more
investment in our economy in addition to
that we have to move on other areas that
are holding back bro i refer for example
the distressed areas we have to move
into those areas with programs so that
we make adequate use of the resources of
those areas we also have to see that all
of the people of the united states the
tremendous talents that our people have
are used adequately that's why in this
whole area of civil rights the equality
of opportunity for employment and
education is not just for the benefit of
the minority groups it's for the benefit
of the nation so that we can get the
scientists and the engineers and all the
rest that we need and in addition to
that we need programs particularly in
higher education which will stimulate
scientific breakthroughs which will
bring more growth now what all this of
course adds up to is this america has
not been standing still let's get that
straight anybody who says america's been
standing still for the last seven and a
half years hasn't been traveling around
america he's been traveling in some
other country we have been moving we
have been moving much faster than we did
in the truman years
but we can and must move faster and
that's why i stand so strongly for
programs that will move america forward
in the 60s mover forward so that we can
stay ahead of the soviet union and win
the battle for freedom and peace senator
well first me i correct a statement
which was made before that under my
agricultural program food prices would
go up 25 that's untrue the farmer who
grows wheat gets about two and a half
cents out of a 25 cent loaf of bread
even if you put his income up ten
i'd be 2 and 3/4 percent three percent
three cents out of that 25 cents its man
who grows tomatoes it costs less for
those tomatoes than it does for the
label in the can and i believe when the
average hour for many farmers wages
about 50 cents now he should do better
but anybody who suggests that that
program would come to any figure
indicated by the vice president is an
error the vice-president suggested a
number of things he suggested that we
aid distressed areas the administration
has vetoed that bill passed by the
congress twice he suggested we passed an
aid to education bill the administration
and the republican majority in the
congress has opposed any realistic aid
to education and the vice president cast
the deciding vote against federal aid
for teacher salaries in the senate which
prevented that being added this
administration and this country last
year had the lowest rate of economic
growth which means jobs of any major
industrialized society in the world in
1959 and when we have to find 25,000 new
jobs a week for the next 10 years we're
going to have to grow more governor
rockefeller says 5 democratic platform
and others say 5 percent many say four
and a half percent last eight years the
average growth has been about two and a
half percent that's why we don't have
full employment today mr magee has the
next question for senator kennedy
senator kennedy a moment ago you
mentioned tax loopholes your running
mate senator lyndon johnson is from
texas an oil-producing state and one
that many political leaders feel is in
doubt in this election year and reports
from there say that oil men in texas are
seeking assurance from senator johnson
that the oil depletion allowance will
not be cut the democratic platform
pledges to plug loopholes in the tax
laws and refers to in
equitable depletion allowance as being
conspicuous loopholes my question is do
you consider the twenty seven and a half
percent depletion allowance inequitable
and would you ask that it be cut mr
there are about a hundred and four
commodities that have some kind of
depletion allowance different kind of
minerals including oil i believe all of
those should be going over in detail
make sure that no one is getting a tax
break to make sure that no one is
getting away from paying the taxes he
ought to pay that includes oil and
includes all kinds of minerals that
includes everything within the range of
taxation we want to be sure it's fair
and equitable it includes oil abroad
perhaps that oil abroad should be
treated differently than the oil error
here at home now the oil industry
recently has had hard times particularly
some of the smaller producers they're
removing about eight or nine days in
texas but i can assure you that if i'm
elected president the whole spectrum of
taxes will be going through carefully
and if there is any inequities in oil or
any other commodity then i would vote to
close that loophole i have voted in the
past to reduce the depletion allowance
for the largest producers for those from
five million dollars down to maintain it
twenty-seven and a half percent i
believe we should study this and other
allowances tax expense dividend expenses
and all the rest and make a
determination of how we can stimulate
growth how we can provide the revenues
needed to move our country forward mr
vice president
senator kennedy's position and mine are
completely different on this i favor the
present depletion allowance i favor it
not because i want to make a lot of
oilman rich but because i want to make
america rich why do we have a depletion
allowance because this is the
stimulation the incentive for companies
to go out and explore for oil to develop
it if we didn't have a depletion
allowance of certainly i believe the
president amount we would have our oil
exploration cut substantially in this
country now as far as my position then
is concerned it is exactly opposite to
the senators and it's because of my
belief that if america is going to have
the growth that he talks about and that
i talk about and that we want the thing
to do is not the discouraged individual
not to discourage people to go out and
discover more oil and minerals but to
encourage and so he would be doing
exactly the wrong thing one other thing
he suggests that there are a number of
other items in this whole deflation
field that could be taken into account
he also said a moment ago that we would
get more money to finance his programs
by revising the tax laws including
depletion i should point out but as far
as depletion allowances are concerned
the oil depletion allowance is one that
provides eighty percent of all of those
involved in depletion but you're not
going to get much from revenue insofar
as depletion allowances are concerned
unless you've moved in the area that he
indicated but i oppose it i oppose it
for the reasons that i mentioned i
oppose it because i want us to have more
oil exploration and not less gentlemen
if i may remind you the time is growing
short so please keep your questions and
answers his brief as possible consistent
with clarity mr von fremd for
vice-president nixon
mr vice president in the past three
years there has been an exodus of more
than four billion dollars of gold from
the united states apparently for two
reasons because exports have slumped and
haven't covered imports and because of
increased american investments abroad if
you were president how would you go
about stopping this departure of gold
from our shores mr vonn friend the
first thing we have to do is to continue
to keep confidence abroad in the
american dollar that means that we must
continue to have a balanced budget here
at home in every possible circumstance
that we can because the moment that we
have loss of confidence in our own
fiscal policies at home it results in
gold flowing out secondly we have to
increase our exports as compared with
our employers and here we have a very
strong program going forward in the
department of commerce this one must be
stepped up beyond that as far as the
gold supply is concerned and as far as
the movement of gold is concerned we
have to bear in mind that we must get
more help from our allies abroad in this
great venture in which all freemen are
of winning the battle for freedom now
america has been carrying a tremendous
load in this respect i think we have
been right incurring i have favored our
programs abroad for economic assistance
and for military assistance but now we
find that the countries of europe for
example that we evaded and japan that
we've aided in the far east these
countries some are former enemies some
our friends have now recovered
completely they have got to bear a
greater share of this load of economic
assistance abroad that's why i am
advocating and will develop during the
course of the next administration if of
course i get the opportunity a program
in which we enlist more aid from these
other countries on a concerted basis in
the programs of economic development for
africa asia and latin america the united
states cannot continue to carry the
major share of this burden by itself we
can tear a big share of but we've got to
have more help from our friends abroad
and these three factors i think will be
very helpful in reversing the gold for
which you spoke about senator kennedy
fister were correct the record mr nixon
said on depletion that his record was
the opposite of mind what i said was
this matter should be fairly going in to
make sure that there aren't loopholes is
record is the opposite of that that
means that he doesn't want to go into it
now on the question of the gold the
difficulty of course is that we do have
heavy obligations abroad that we
therefore have to maintain not only a
favorable balance of trade but also send
a good deal of our dollars overseas to
pay our troops maintain our bases and
sustain other economy in other words if
we're going to continue to maintain our
position in the sixties we have to
maintain a sound monetary and fiscal
policy we have to have control over
inflation and we also have to have a
favorable balance of trade we have to be
able to compete in the world market we
have to be able to sell abroad more than
we consume of roam abroad if we're going
to be able to meet our obligation in
addition many of the countries around
the world still keep restrictions
against our goods going all the way back
to the days when there was a dollar
shortage now there isn't a dollar short
and yet many of these countries continue
the move against our good i believe that
we must be able to compete in them
steel and all the basic commodities
abroad we must be able to compete
against them because we always did
because of our technological lead we
have to be sure to maintain it we have
to persuade these other countries not to
respect our goods and coming in not to
act as if there was a dollar gap and
third we have to persuade them to assume
some of the responsibilities is up till
now we've maintained to assist
underdeveloped countries in africa latin
american asia make an economic
breakthrough on their own mr drummond's
posture now for senator kennedy under
kennedy a question on american prestige
in light of the fact that the soviet
ambassador was recently expelled from
the congo and that mr khrushchev has
this week canceled his trip to cuba for
fear of stirring resentment throughout
all latin america i would like to ask
you to spell out somewhat more fully how
you think we should measure american
prestige to determine whether it is
rising or whether it is falling well i
think there are many year tests mr
drummond of prestige the significance of
pres dee's really is because we're so
identified with the cause of freedom
therefore if we are on the mount we
arise the power influence is spreading
if our prestige is spreading then those
who stand now on the razor edge of
decision between us or between the
communist system wondering whether they
should use the system of freedom to
develop their countries or the system of
they'll be persuaded to follow our
example there have been several
indications that our prestige is not as
high as it once was mr george allen the
head of our information service said
that a result of our being second in
space in the sputnik in 1957 and i quote
him i believe i paraphrase him
accurately he said that many of these
countries equate space developments with
scientific productivity and scientific
advancement and therefore he said many
of these countries now feel that the
soviet union which wars once so backward
is now in a par with the united states
technically the economic growth of the
soviet union is greater than ours mr
dulles who suggested it's from 2 to 3
times as great as ours this has a great
effect on the underdeveloped world which
faces problem
of low income and high population
density and inadequate resources 3 a
gallup poll taken in february ask people
in 10 countries to which country they
thought would be first in 1970 both
scientifically and militarily and a
majority in every country except greece
felt that it would be the soviet union
by 1974 in the votes at the un
particularly the boat dealing with red
china last saturday we received the
support on the position that we had
taken of only two african countries one
liberia which have been tied to us for
more than a century and the other union
of south africa which is not a popular
country in africa every other caf
african country either abstained or
voted against us a more countries voted
against us in asia on this issue than
voted with us on the neutralist
resolution which we were so much opposed
to the same thing happened the candidate
who was a candidate for the president of
brazil took a trip to cuba to call on
mr castro during the election in order
to get the benefit of the castro
supporters within brazil there are many
indications guinea and ghana two
independent countries within the last
three years guinea and 57 ghana within
the last 18 months both now are
supporting the soviet foreign policy at
the un mr herda said so himself
layoffs is moving in that direction so i
would say our prestige is not so high no
longer do we give the image of being on
the rise the long do we give an image of
vitality mr vice president i would say
first of all that senators kennedy's
statement that he just made is not going
to help our gallup polls abroad he isn't
going to help our prestige either let's
look at the other side of the coin let's
look at the vote on the congo the vote
was 70 to nothing against the soviet
union let's look at the situation with
regard to economic growth as it really
is we find that the soviet union is a
very primitive economy its growth rate
is not what counts
it's whether it is catching up with us
and it is not catching up with us where
well i had and we can stay ahead
provided we have confidence in america
and don't run her down in order to build
her up we could look also at other items
which senator kennedy has named but i
will only conclude by saying this
in this whole matter of prestige in the
final analysis whether you stand for
what's right and getting back to this
matter that we discussed at the outset
the matter of chemo and matsu i can
think of nothing that will be a greater
blow to the prestige of the united
states among the free nations in asia
and for us to take senator kennedy's
event advice there will go against what
a majority of the members of the senate
both democrat and republican did it said
in 1955 and to say in advance we will
surrender an area to the communists in
other words if the united states is
going to maintain its strength and its
prestige we must not only be strong
militarily and economically we must be
firm diplomatically as certainly we have
been speaking i know of whether we
should have retreat or defeat let's
remember that the way to win is not to
retreat and not to surrender thank you
as we mentioned at the opening of this
program the candidates agreed that the
clock alone would determine who had the
last word the two candidates wish to
thank the network's for the opportunity
to appear for this discussion i would
repeat the ground rules likewise agreed
upon by representatives of the two
candidates and the radio and television
networks the entire hour was devoted to
answering questions from the reporters
each candidate was questioned in turn
and each had the opportunity to comment
on the answer of his opponent the
reporters were free to ask any question
on any subject neither candidate was
given any advance information on any
question that would be asked those were
the conditions great upon for this third
meeting of the candidates tonight now i
might add that also a great upon was the
fact that when the hour got down to the
last few minutes if there was not
sufficient time left for another
question and suitable time for answer in
common the questioning would end at that
point that is the situation at this
moment and after reviewing the rules for
this evening i by
use the remaining few moments of the
hour to tell you something about the
other arrangements for this debate with
the participants a continent apart i
would emphasize first that each
candidate was in a studio alone except
for three photographers and three
reporters of the press and the
television technicians those studios
identical in every detail of lighting
background physical equipment even to
the paint used in decorating
we news men in the third studio have
also experienced a somewhat similar
isolation now i would remind you the
fourth in the series of these historic
joint appearances scheduled for friday
october 21st at that time the candidates
will again share the same platform to
discuss foreign policy this is bill
chanel good night